---
permalink: /2006/5/23/no-fluff-just-stuff
date: '2006-05-23 00:53:00'
title: >-
    no fluff just stuff: day first talks
---

this year i was actually anticipating the conference, waiting
impatiently for the release from work tedium. i tend to feed on the
energy of others, and these intense three-day gatherings are a perfect
boost that lasts for months afterward.

this time i chose to attend fewer purely technical talks. i think some
of it is the result that i have to work with people a lot more in my new
role, and i am trying to figure out how to be better at it - there seems
to be a lot of non-tangible things that i am struggling with. another
side of it - i am trying to decide what architecture is as opposed to
development, where is it that i am trying to go, what is it that i am
interested in doing, and what my focus should be, given that the time is
limited.

of course some of it also comes from the gratifying masturbatory effect
of bitching about work and those cavemen coworkers (the theme that was
running strong last year, and something i am too eager to jump into
myself).

on friday afternoon i caught the end of [ramnivas
laddad](http://www.nofluffjuststuff.com/speaker_view.jsp?speakerId=8 "ramnivas laddad")
talk on AOP ("[state of
aop](http://www.nofluffjuststuff.com/speaker_topic_view.jsp?topicId=197 "state of aop")",
to be exact). nothing groundbreaking there, just a nice rundown on
load-time weaving (relying on JVMTI agents), [bea's take on
aspects](http://dev2dev.bea.com/pub/a/2005/08/jvm_aop_1.html) in jrockit
(do not miss reflective calls), xml and annotation syntax for aspects,
eclipse AJDT, java5 features support. it was a little disappointing to
see the obligatory logging example (i thought any AOP guy is fed up with
these). most of this is already familiar to anyone that followed the AOP
landscape, even from the distance; not a bad talk for anyone that is
just starting out. one of the best AOP talks last year was on
step-by-step adoption techniques with cookbook examples. i think this is
the best way of introduction, since a lot of people are just paralyzed
by the power available to them, not knowing where to start.

next i stopped by
[venkat](http://www.nofluffjuststuff.com/speaker_view.jsp?speakerId=11)'s
"[refactoring your
code](http://www.nofluffjuststuff.com/speaker_topic_view.jsp?topicId=287)"
talk. i remember him being an excellent speaker, and i primarily wanted
to see how he explains this already familiar topic - perhaps copy a
trick or two to use myself if i were to speak in front of others.
instead i was simply drawn in and followed every moment of the
presentation. he was coding at breakneck pace, and yet amazing lucid,
humorous, and illustrative, tying it altogether with the agile
development principles. the examples were excellent; he was getting
feedback from the audience, and yet driving the talk; setting up little
traps and problems and solving them effectively, illustrating the point.
his real-life anecdotes are so vivid often crossing the boundary into
absurd; and they stick in your mind, together with his deadpan delivery.
he is so natural, none of this stuff is forced or awkward. excellent
talk; as a teacher he is unsurpased. a nice example of repetition as a
stepping stone that gradually lets one refactor methodically and safely.
some quotes from [william
zinsser](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Zinsser) on writing. and
some famouse quotes (perhaps if i write them down, i will actually
remember them):

> perfection is achieved, not when there is nothing left to add, but
> when there is nothing left to remove. (Antoine de Saint-Exupery)

> Programs must be written for people to read, and only incidentally for
> machines to execute. (Abelson and Sussman)

> unit tests and code is like my left leg and my right leg - i do not
> walk three miles just on my right leg and then switch

this set the theme for venkat's talks for the rest of the weekend - i
attended his talks on seemingly familiar topics, but he managed to
either illuminate them from a different perspective, or really arrange
them properly in my head, clarify and organize them. i seem to get a lot
of stuff on very intuitive level, and then it takes me a while until i
can clearly formulate it. teaching would probably be the best way to get
it organized, but venkat's talks is a nice shortcut for that. some of
this stuff is also available on [his
website](http://agiledeveloper.com/download.aspx).

still under the impression from the books i've read, i went to see
[bruce
tate](http://www.nofluffjuststuff.com/speaker_view.jsp?speakerId=12)'s
talk on effective teams ("[effective teams: the dirty little
secret](http://www.nofluffjuststuff.com/speaker_topic_view.jsp?topicId=358)").
it was pretty decent, although a little tedious at times (when we had to
remember what the letters were corresponding to the personalities and
then go through the examples). up to this date the best books on team
organization were
"[peopleware](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0932633439/sr=8-1/qid=1148358705/ref=pd_bbs_1/102-5665184-5856109?%5Fencoding=UTF8)",
"[rapid
development](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1556159005/sr=8-1/qid=1148358760/ref=pd_bbs_1/102-5665184-5856109?%5Fencoding=UTF8)",
two joel books ("[best in software writing
1](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1590595009/sr=8-1/qid=1148358796/ref=pd_bbs_1/102-5665184-5856109?%5Fencoding=UTF8)"
and "[joel on
software](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1590593898/sr=8-2/qid=1148358796/ref=pd_bbs_2/102-5665184-5856109?%5Fencoding=UTF8)")
and many-many blogs on interviewing ([stevey's drunken blog
rants](http://www.cabochon.com/~stevey/blog-rants/) is one of the recent
favorites). so a lot of the stuff was already familiar, although it was
nice to see a distillation of personalities (rock vs. visionary, as well
as [myers-briggs](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Myers-briggs) personality
test), as well as reaffirmation that good teams need both (here it is
also pertinent to mention the difference between a developer and a
programmer, and where each one fits). another good point - mentoring
(get one; perhaps even outside of company) and keeping up.

looking through the slides for the first day, i realized that [glenn
vanderburg](http://www.nofluffjuststuff.com/speaker_view.jsp?speakerId=17)
had a very nice [talk on collections
api](http://www.nofluffjuststuff.com/speaker_topic_view.jsp?topicId=88); filled with practical details, very hands on, very useful. i think
this goes for all of his other talks that weekend - very well
researched, very thorough, very technical, in retrospect, i wish i have
attended more of them.
