---
permalink: /2007/8/6/hiring-technical-people
date: '2007-08-06 15:03:00'
title: >-
    hiring technical people
---

as an addendum to [previous
post](/2007/6/29/we-are-looking-for-interview-guidlines): although i
mentioned one of the [johanna rothman’s](http://www.jrothman.com/)
articles in the list of links, she really warrants a separate mention.

<img src="/assets/2007/8/27/jrothman_manageit.jpg" data-align="right" data-hspace="10" />

i really, really liked her [manage
it!](http://www.amazon.com/Manage-Modern-Pragmatic-Project-Management/dp/0978739248)
book (published by [pragmatic
programmers](http://www.pragmaticprogrammer.com/)). at first it seemed a
bit dry, compared to [weinberg’s writing](/2007/3/11/reading-weinberg)
(he contributes an introduction), but the feeling goes away after a few
chapters.

i just feel so comfortable with her take on project management – there
is no agilist zealotry or flashy theatrics. she is indeed very pragmatic
– she acknowledges different organizations and different projects and
teams, she introduces options and alternatives and explains the reasons
for each. there are practical tips as well as a larger overall motifs
that drive them.

but back to subject of this post – a few weekends ago i spent a whole
day combing through her excellent [hiring technical people
blog](http://www.jrothman.com/weblog/htpblogger.html). once again, it is
perfectly pragmatic, i especially enjoy her style as she explores the
ideas, not necessarily presenting them as truths handed down from above.

<img src="/assets/2007/8/27/jrothman_hiring.jpg" data-align="right" data-hspace="10" />

compare this with [joel](http://www.joelonsoftware.com/) – he recently
cleaned up and released his writing on hiring ([smart and gets things
done](http://www.amazon.com/Smart-Gets-Things-Done-Technical/dp/1590598385)
– which i already purchased). i really appreciate many of his ideas, and
i think he’s done a great service to the industry by popularizing them,
but i do not find myself trusting him fully as a reader – there is too
much glitz and posturing, desire to shock and awe. plus he keeps
forgetting about being humble – he is an owner of a boutique software
company – he is damn good at what he does, but it means just that.

in any case, i have ordered [johanna’s
book](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0932633595) on
hiring technical people. she also co-authored another book on project
management from pragprogs – [behind closed doors: secrets of great
management](http://www.amazon.com/Behind-Closed-Doors-Management-Programmers/dp/0976694026),
which i am yet to read.

finally, [her site](http://www.jrothman.com/) contains [another blog on
project management](http://www.jrothman.com/weblog/blogger.html), as
well as a collection of articles, links to her guest blogs on other
sites, etc. she is also a regular at annual [amplifying your
effectiveness](http://www.ayeconference.com/) conference, which i really
should be going to.
