---
permalink: /2007/12/3/security-silver-bullet
date: '2007-12-03 01:23:00'
title: >-
    security silver bullet
---

i am [still on the lookout](/2006/12/10/when-do-you-think) for quality
podcasts. one of the series i’ve been really enjoying lately is [silver
bullet security podcast](http://www.cigital.com/silverbullet/) by [gary
mcgraw](http://www.cigital.com/~gem/).

<img src="/assets/2007/11/26/silverbullet_security_podcast-small.jpg" data-hspace="10" data-align="right" />

i am a bit of a fanboy – i’ve got [all
three](http://www.buildingsecurityin.com/books/set/) of his software
security books, and i have been following him for a while – listening to
the interviews and reading the articles.

i go through a lot of podcasts on regular basis, and “silver bullet” is
one of the most impressive ones. first of all, the sound quality itself
is pretty damn good. having suffered through some badly-recorded,
non-normalized audio in the past, i am happily listening to articulate,
passionate folks that actually sound good. perhaps the sound quality it
is due to gary mcgraw’s [music career](http://www.wheresaubrey.com/).

secondly, he manages to pull together an impressive array of people that
have proven themselves over the years in the field of security. in most
cases they’ve been at it for decades, and it shows.

since security is a relatively new field, most of his guests come from
different backgrounds, which makes interviews all the more interesting.
gary mcgraw himself did his undergrad in philosophy, while his phd was
in CS and cognitive science under [douglas
hofstadter](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Douglas_Hofstadter) (in fact,
gary mcgraw contributed a chapter to [Fluid Concepts and Creative
Analogies](http://www.cogsci.indiana.edu/fcca.html)).

having read his books, there is not much new in the podcast, but it
really helps to clarify and reinforce the basics as well as acquire the
vocabulary to be able to discuss these topics. this is why i am on my
second round re-listening to the podcast.

one of the main insights i got from listening to the podcast came from
its title. “silver bullet” is [the famous
essay](http://tinyurl.com/2ke648) by brooks where he argues that there
are inherent complexities in software development that will not
magically disappear by introducing better tools or practices.

security is complex. there are accidental complexities, that could be
(and are) addressed – get rid of languages with memory overflow
problems, introduce [address space layout
randomization](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Address_space_layout_randomization),
use [static analysis
tools](http://www.fortifysoftware.com/products/sca/), etc.

at the same time there are inherent, essential complexities to security
that will always be in place due to new applications that create new
attack vectors simply by the virtue of their functionality.

thus it is logical to see security overlapping with QA (QA being quality
assurance as a process, which deals with *ensuring* that quality
happens, as opposed to testing which is simply one aspect of it). given
this approach, a lot of things about security fall into place: “security
means risk management”, “security is a process, not a product”, “there
is not absolute security”, “security faults are quality faults”, “it is
harder to build a secure system than to break one”, “one cannot sprinkle
some magic security dust at the end of the project”, usefulness of
“badness-ometers” as gary calls them, etc (these one-liners have such a
nice ring to them and stimulate thinking in the right direction; they
are butchering the contents of the books though, so read them for the
facts!).

since podcast series are not that technical at all (although most of the
participants are quite hardcore hackers), i would wholeheartedly
recommend them to the broadest audience.
