---
permalink: /2006/9/4/why-wiki
date: '2006-09-04 10:49:00'
title: >-
    why wiki
---

Over the years I have used various Wiki packages at work and for
personal use/freelance. Currently I am using
[Trac](http://trac.edgewall.org/ "Trac") for the freelance stuff, and at
work I have tried a number of things, from
[JSPWiki](http://jspwiki.org/ "JSPWiki") and
[Daisy](http://cocoondev.org/daisy/ "Daisy") to
[Confluence](http://www.atlassian.com/software/confluence/ "Confluence").
Currently I have been using [SnipSnap](http://snipsnap.org/ "SnipSnap")
at work for almost three years, and recently I have installed and
configured [Trac](http://trac.edgewall.org/ "Trac") for our team.

I believe that the biggest benefit of the Wiki is its grass-roots
nature, especially when it is being used by a small team on regular
basis. I doubt it might ever grow to be "enterprise" in our company for
various reasons (even with something like
[Confluence](http://www.atlassian.com/software/confluence/ "Confluence")),
but it is indispensable for department- and team-sized work.

Below is a small blog-like post justifying the Wiki for our team.

## why wiki

<img src="/assets/2007/8/27/athletes.jpg" data-align="right" data-vspace="10" />

wiki is the simplest possible content management system, collaboratively
edited. it works best for creating and evolving documentation. it is not
a document storage, but a website where each page is a document.

personally, as i work (do research, jot down ideas, document something),
i take notes and evolve these notes using the wiki. i continuously
*refactor* and connect these ideas, thus building content.

most people still do it on their own machines - they edit documents
locally, and then they share with others through email and attachments.
everyone knows how flawed this is - there are numerous versions floating
around, no one knows which one is the latest, keeping track of edits is
a nightmare if you have more than two people, finding these documents is
hard, etc.

next logical step (which sharepoint took) is to store these documents in
a central place. this seems like a good solution on the surface, but it
is terribly inconvenient, since these documents are opaque, not being
cross-linked together they lack context; in order to view them one must
launch an office application, removing the context even further.

with wikis the approach is simpler - my documents are web pages; i edit
them in place with simple syntax; i cross-link them easily, thus
creating context; they are immediately published and available for
others to see and edit. in other words, i build on the foundation that
made internet happen using tools that make publishing trivial.

-   immediate tangible benefits are *live documents* - when i pass
    around the link to the wiki article, it is often self-describing,
    pointing to the latest version of the article, so i do not have to
    worry about people looking at the obsolete version of some word
    document in some email. as an example, when someone asks me a
    question, instead of putting the answer into an email, i put it in
    the wiki, then send them a link to it
-   i can easily see the difference between documents, since they are
    just text
-   it allows multiple people to easily edit documents simultaneously
-   it also allows me to easily build context - cross-link documents
    and, in this particular tool (Trac), supply them with *tags*

the idea is to keep content as open as possible, and its editing as
simple as possible, lowering the barrier for entry for participants that
can help evolve the content.

to summarize, i will quote [ray
ozzie](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ray_Ozzie) [once
again](http://blog.splitbody.com/articles/2006/03/10/social-software-in-enterprise)
(from his acm interview on social computing):

> I think one of the big promises of all of this technology is to make
> it easy for people to leave trails of artifacts that can be used later
> when you don't really expect it.

## trac

Trac is a Wiki engine tightly integrated with source control browser and
ticketing/issues system that provides a very lightweight (in terms of
process) and flexible software project management system. Its main
benefit is the ability to put all software project artifacts in context,
tying together source code view, changesets, tickets/issues, and
documentation.

Trac instance is best scoped per project, thus somewhat limiting its
use. With other wiki engines like
[Confluence](http://www.atlassian.com/software/confluence/ "Confluence"),
this is not an issue.

Trac architecture allows for a multitude of extensions; it has a vibrant
user community, and it has been around for quite a while with a number
of high-profile deployments. It is free.

## why not sharepoint

<img src="/assets/2007/8/27/sharepoint_tank.jpg" data-align="right" data-hspace="10" />

sharepoint is a content management system (CMS). for simple "live"
documentation described above sharepoint is an overkill - all i want is
the simplest possible way to create ad-hoc documents, version them, and
pass around simple self-describing references to them (not gargantuan
sharepoint urls). i want a simple and easy way to build documentation
(or artifacts, in a more general sense) as i work.

in case of documentation sharepoint is somewhat of an inversion of a
problem. instead of keeping my existing word documents, what i want to
do is create simple documents in place, evolve them, and version them as
i work. thus when i browse the site, i want to see content, not opaque
document containers. this approach bypasses the office suite, and i can
see why microsoft has to be careful not to kill its cash cow by
introducing wiki features into sharepoint.

if my needs go beyond simple documentation, sharepoint (especially with
infopath) is a tool worth looking into. it makes it very easy to create
applications on top of documents, provide workflow, complex user
interfaces, etc without any need for coding.

the question really becomes how far you can go with the wiki before you
need all the features of sharepoint (or other full-blown CMS). the
answer is that for most people a wiki would be perfectly enough; start
with the wiki and grow into CMS.
