---
permalink: /2009/12/4/qcon2009sf
date: '2009-12-04 04:50:00'
title: >-
    qcon2009sf
---

it was my first time at [qcon](http://qconsf.com/sf2009/conference/),
and i found myself quite conflicted before the conference – i kept
asking, what was the main reason for me to attend?

i already know roughly 75% of the speakers – i’ve read their books, i
have been following their blogs and twitter feeds, i even saw their
presentations online. i know for the most part what they would be
telling the masses, thus i could not expect a blow-your-mind experience,
the ultimate conference “catch” i am sure everyone is after. perhaps
this is the curse and the blessing of the ultimate transparency.

if i am interested in this stuff, i have already taken all the easier
steps to get up to speed; attending a conference comes next for me – not
before, not instead.

as it turns out, once you get a dozen or so people that roughly have the
same level of expertise and the same interests, and that do not expect
to be spoonfed as they doze off, something else emerges – a
conversation. this is the main attraction for me – conversations around
the speakers – whether they are happening during their sessions (best
case scenario) or in-between.

i do not arrive there to be re-told the ideas i have already heard, i
would like to use them as a basis to explore further.

these days conferences where i know most of the topics and the speakers
are definitely about conversations. this probably does not apply to a
lot more focused/specialized conferences or those where i am not as
familiar with the speakers. but here’s the paradox – i need to know the
speakers well enough before i decide to go, at which point it seems like
there is no reason to go anymore.

i am after passionate, articulate experts in their respective fields
leading and participating in a conversation where most of the people are
already familiar with each others’ backgrounds, arguments, works, and
build on top of that.

which leads to a few conclusions, stemming from the need to create and
nurture conversations. the whole idea of a keynote for a large audience
is useless to me, since anything over a 15-minute intro is something i
have probably seen/read already; any audience that is more than 20
people is too large; any audience that is not “up to speed” on the
topics discussed will drag the conversation down.

the requirements above are probably a bit idealistic, but good user
groups, and self-selecting gatherings (like hacker b&b at [Stu
Halloway’s](http://thinkrelevance.com/team) i was fortunate enough to
have been invited to this summer) prove that it is possible. another
example is [speakerconf](http://speakerconf.com/), although its
selection bias might turn it into an echo chamber.

so given all this, how did qcon fare? each day had something good, and i
will try to write these highlights down in the next post.

would i attend again? it all depends on the speakers, and, even more
importantly, whether i would be able to get to know more people
beforehand and thus have good conversations outside of conference
sessions.
