---
permalink: /2009/6/6/goruco-2009
date: '2009-06-06 22:11:00'
title: >-
    GoRuCo 2009
---

[gotham ruby confrence](http://www.goruco.com/) is the nyc’s own ruby
conference organized by [nyc ruby users group](http://nycruby.org/). it
was my second time attending it. this post is an attempt to organize my
own notes, as well as an attempt at feedback that i think i owe to the
speakers and the organizers.

i really like the smaller focused gatherings like this with around a
hundred-plus attendees – there is definitely a community spirit there,
since a lot of the folks are local and already know each other.

there is also more focused discussion, since the background of the
people in the room is similar. a lot of the culture is shared, a lot of
the values are implied, and the conversation zips along nicely. i have
stopped attending local java groups precisely for the lack of this
common background – the topics are too broad, the backgrounds are too
different, and it takes a lot of effort to communicate ideas.

i am a bit uneasy about my own relationship with the ruby community – i
am not really contributing, nor am i doing paid ruby work. i also am a
bit weary of the monoculture (look at them macboys and macgirls!) that
tends to re-invent the wheel way too often. but i am there for the
excitement, for the bright-eyed kids that tinker and create things –
this energy is infectious and i feed off it. it is inspirational and
energizing.

so why am i going to the conferences like these? in addition to the
energy boost i mentioned above, there is also the trivia of learning
about tools, projects, approaches; getting the feel for the zeitgeist,
where things are heading, what folks are thinking. deep down inside i am
always looking for the “blow your mind” experience, something that can
turn a familiar topic on its head, something that can make me discover
things i have never suspected existed.

GoRuCo had a nice balance – things technical and detailed, and also
approaches/techniques/principles. the reject conf at the end – a series
of quick lightning talks – was an icing on the cake, stuffing you full
of references, pointers, tips that you could take home and work through
at your own pace.

#### [Gregory Brown: Where is Ruby really heading?](http://www.goruco.com/speakers.html#brown)

more of a book report, talking about different versions of ruby out
there. for anyone following the community, none of it was a surprise. no
hard data either, just his personal anecdotal experience. this part of
the talk was more suited to a short user group presentation.

there were a few nice tips and personal war stories related to moving
between 1.8.6, 1.8.7 and 1.9.1, unicode, side-by-side installs and very
basic crude techniques to code for different versions.

these are typical growing pains – everything from the compatibility
issues between versions to the curse of the system-wide install that
makes one go an extra mile in order to run different apps under
different ruby versions on the same box (i always preferred the
semi-structured self-contained java jdk installs and jars controlled by
the classpath).

there were some props to [jruby](http://jruby.codehaus.org/) (it is a
real distro, not a hack to reach out for when all else fails!), mentions
of [ffi](http://kenai.com/projects/jffi/) in jruby that allowed
gregory’s project to run on windows.

#### [Eleanor McHugh: The Ruby Guide to \*nix Plumbing](http://www.goruco.com/speakers.html#mchugh)

this could have been a great talk, but it seems like eleanor was really
hungover, so instead it was a very disconnected series of ramblings on
the general subject of unix and coding. very poor delivery, and at times
plain embarrassing.

only towards the end she managed to find the message for the talk, which
was “you can code against kernel internals using ruby, since it makes it
much easier. do not automatically assume that you need to write in C for
performance – try ruby first.”

she also highlighted ruby community’s respect for bare-metal – the
ability to tinker, the taste for small simple tools that do the job
well, and the affinity for unix. this is exactly what attracted me to
the language in the first place.

there were a lot of references that at times seemed like name-dropping:
[ngnix](http://nginx.net/), [beej’s guide to network
programming](http://beej.us/guide/bgnet/), [beej’s guide to unix
interprocess communication](http://beej.us/guide/bgipc/),
[ruby/dl](http://ttsky.net/ruby/ruby-dl.html),
[duby](http://blog.headius.com/2008/03/duby-type-inferred-ruby-like-jvm.html),
[event machine](http://rubyeventmachine.com/), [c10k
problem](http://www.kegel.com/c10k.html), [advanced unix
programming](http://www.amazon.com/Advanced-Programming-Addison-Wesley-Professional-Computing/dp/0131411543)
book

#### [Dan Yoder: Resource-Oriented Architecture With Waves](http://www.goruco.com/speakers.html#yoder)

dan briefly talked about his [waves](http://rubywaves.com/) framework
that tries to present a simple <span class="caps">DSL</span> around
<span class="caps">HTTP</span> and resource representation in a <span
class="caps">REST</span> fashion.

the meat of the talk that was interesting to me dealt with <span
class="caps">REST</span> in general, its differences from <span
class="caps">MVC</span>, resource-oriented architecture, self-describing
data, returning links to other data inside of data to aid
discoverability. he mentioned how a resource identifier (e.g. <span
class="caps">URL</span>) should not specify representation (i.e. do not
add .xml to specify that you need an <span class="caps">XML</span>
document back), but rely on client’s `Accept`\* headers to negotiate
representation (caveat being that CDNs like Akamai do not currently care
about these headers, so you will always get the same content).

there was also a mention of the fact that sometimes one can view <span
class="caps">HTTP</span> protocol as something dealing with a
distributed hash table (DHT) using `get/put/delete` operations (with
`post` reserved for everything else).

[<span class="caps">RDF</span>](http://www.w3.org/RDF/) and
[freebase](http://www.freebase.com/) were also mentioned.

i have a strange relationship with <span class="caps">REST</span>: i get
it on the technical level, i sort of get it on the architecture level,
but it did not fully “click” yet, perhaps due to the fact that i do not
have enough practical implementations under my belt. i should go through
the [restful webservice](http://oreilly.com/catalog/9780596529260/) book
again and play around.

good talk overall, but lacking concrete examples that could have brought
things more into focus.

#### [Jake Howerton: Into the Heart of Darkness: Rails Anti-Patterns](http://www.goruco.com/speakers.html#howerton)

a bit of a disappointment, since the title promised so much. i usually
really liked the anti-pattern talks, since you learn nothing when things
work as expected – the real learning comes when things break, and you
are forced to dig in and figure out why. plus these talks also give you
an idea of applicability of certain techniques, which is really a
required counterpart for all patterns to begin with (beware of
[dartboard-driven
design](http://www.codingthewheel.com/archives/dartboard-driven-design)).

instead we were treated to a very few amusing short code snippets, but
no larger patterns in the sense of fowler’s [refactoring
book](http://www.refactoring.com/) or even rails-specific patterns.

he did mention [cucumber](http://cukes.info/),
[reek](http://wiki.github.com/kevinrutherford/reek) and
[metric_fu](http://metric-fu.rubyforge.org/) and some general well-known
testing techniques. i liked his term “flight check” for the smoke tests
that run before deployment to prod, and a notion of sandbox test
environment where mocks are replaced with real classes that do
destructive things without impacting the real world (like sending
emails).

i also like his term “irb-driven design” for something that was
copy-pasted from the exploratory irb session into the production code.

there was also some treatise of legacy code, but i think [dhh’s talk on
the subject](http://itc.conversationsnetwork.org/shows/detail3987.html)
was much better.

overall it was a fun, light talk that was well-received. i blame the
deceiving title and the lack of focus for initial feeling of
disappointment; it felt like jake was simply talking about things he
does and prefers to do during development, without specific overarching
theme in mind.

#### [Sandi Metz: <span class="caps">SOLID</span> Object Oriented Design](http://www.goruco.com/speakers.html#metz)

[sandi](http://sandimetz.com/) stole the show; she set the level that
none of the speakers matched and showed what it really means to have a
solid, gripping presentation that is lucid, focused, well-prepared, and
superbly delivered.

she talked about [<span
class="caps">SOLID</span>](http://www.butunclebob.com/ArticleS.UncleBob.PrinciplesOfOod)
design principles: Single Responsibility, Open Closed, Liskov
Substitution, Interface Segregation, Dependency Inversion which all boil
down to managing dependencies.

she went through the fowler’s [value of
design](http://www.martinfowler.com/bliki/DesignStaminaHypothesis.html)
argument, and then iteratively went through a refactoring example,
invoking the <span class="caps">SOLID</span> principles along the way.

i think the most impressive for me was how well the whole talk came
together, how the arguments were presented to support the refactorings,
and how well it got into my head (almost uncanny, similar to the effect
the best books in [head first
series](http://headfirstlabs.com/readme.php) have).

some of the principles she kept bringing up – using the rate of change
as the indicator for splitting the functionality; refactor in small
steps to let the design emerge – not because you *know*, but because you
want to *find* the design; red-green-refactor; mock at the seam; only
mock classes i own; those that change often should depend on those that
change less often.

this once again brings up the importance of developing a language to
discuss design (e.g. patterns) – i think this is a crucial step for
every practitioner, when something intuitive and personal (e.g. a vague
code smell) becomes something that you can articulate and communicate to
others.

she also mentioned [uncle
bob](http://blog.objectmentor.com/articles/category/uncle-bobs-blatherings),
[micronaut](http://blog.thinkrelevance.com/2009/3/26/introducing-micronaut-a-lightweight-bdd-framework),
steve freeman and nat pryce [mock objects
site](http://www.mockobjects.com/)

#### [Benjamin Stein: Building Cross Platform Mobile Apps with Ruby & PhoneGap](http://www.goruco.com/speakers.html#stein)

the main promise of [PhoneGap](http://phonegap.com/) is quite compelling
– build cross-platform apps on the phones using javascript while taking
advantage of the native features (vibrate, storage, accelerometer,
sound, gps, etc).

it was a fine presentation, with a story to tell and with a perspective
that put all the low-level details in context. makes me itchy to get my
hands on some phone development; i was also quite impressed with their
adoption of latest standards (e.g. <span class="caps">HTML5</span>).

#### [Yehuda Katz: From Rails to Rack: Making Rails 3 a Better Ruby Citizen](http://www.goruco.com/speakers.html#katz)

rails3 perspective from the horse’s mouth – quite detailed look at how
rails is trying to be less opinionated in its choice of frameworks to
work with, and how it exposes its internals for others to integrate with
(orm, rack, js frameworks). some very interesting examples of design
decisions and the overall future path of the framework.

this was a bit tedious, but quite informative talk.

#### Lightning Talks

i really like these, since most people do not have enough material for a
long talk; in fact some of the main talks earlier should probably have
been half their size.

the highlights include [sunlight
foundation](http://www.sunlightfoundation.com/) and
[data.gov](http://www.data.gov/) plug, a great pair of fast talks by
[aman gupta](http://github.com/tmm1) on
[google-perftools](http://code.google.com/p/google-perftools/) that he
tweaked to work with ruby and used on some real-world code and [joe
damato](http://timetobleed.com/) on [tweaking the thread performance in
ruby
1.8](http://timetobleed.com/fixing-threads-in-ruby-18-a-2-10x-performance-boost/)
(in retrospect, these two talks were something i wish eleanor would have
done).
