---
permalink: /2009/6/7/cloudcamp-nyc-2009
date: '2009-06-07 14:25:00'
title: >-
    cloudcamp nyc
---

i am organizing my notes from [cloudcamp nyc
2009](http://www.cloudcamp.com/newyork/). the whole thing was done the
[unconference style](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FooCamp), and i
bounced around different groups for a few hours.

#### taxonomy

<img src="/assets/2009/5/27/pyramid.jpg" data-align="right" data-hspace="10" />

it seems that folks were struggling to come up with the taxonomy of the
cloud. i see it is a continuum from bare OS instances (amazon’s <span
class="caps">EC2</span>) to increasingly specialized services (google
app engine, S3, salesforce, and even facebook).

bare OS instances are easy – nothing there is new, and what is changing
is the elasticity of the capacity – you can spin up and wind down
instances much faster (and recently announced [amazon’s auto
scaling](http://aws.amazon.com/autoscaling/) makes it even easier). the
only catch there is that you have to design for scalability yourself.
but you have all the power and the flexibility, and there is no lock-in.

the latter is when you give up some of the flexibility for scalability
out of the box – the design and implementation are taken care of for you
– google app engine and facebook just scale. there is a lock-in there,
but you might not care. somewhat unrelated, but
[pmarca](http://blog.pmarca.com) [had some things to say about
it](http://blog.pmarca.com/2007/09/the-three-kinds.html) a while ago.

#### automation

when dealing with OS instances, these developments make it obvious that
if you have not embraced automation yet, it is time to do so. the lone
admin doing things by hand does not cut it anymore; even barebones shell
scripts and basic packaging might not be enough.

the sad thing is that i do not see an easy, thorough, cross-platform
management tool that does everything out of the box.
[cfengine](http://www.cfengine.org/) was the closest thing back in the
day, but i want something that embraces source control and declarative
configuration; something that is transparent and easy to use; something
that is cross-platform.
[chef](http://wiki.opscode.com/display/chef/Home) and
[puppet](http://reductivelabs.com/products/puppet/) look promising.

so there are a lot of new vendors coming out and touting their products
for managing the cloud.

#### monitoring

same thing with monitoring –
[sscope](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SiteScope) was a killer app almost
a decade ago, but i have not seen a compelling polished replacement
(until, possibly, [hyperic](http://www.hyperic.com/)) – something that
could scale down and up, something that can be either agentless for
small easy deployments and agent-based to be able to scale beyond that.
amazon’s [cloud watch](http://aws.amazon.com/cloudwatch/) is a step in
the right direction, but it is just the beginning.

i hope that cloud computing developments will give this industry a push
it needs to clean up its act and finally come up with comprehensive
convenient set of tools that is sorely overdue.

bottom line is that with clouds there will be more stuff to manage, and
the demands for the management tools will become stricter.

i want commodization of these tools – monitoring, deployment, etc.
ideally they will be independent of cloud provider and i want them to be
simple and transparent and composable and hackable.

#### usage scenarios

<img src="/assets/2009/6/7/stance.jpg" data-align="right" data-hspace="10" />

it is almost a no-brainer these days for startups writing green-field
apps to rely on amazon for their capacity. it is great, since they are
not as concerned with SLAs and lock-in is not that big of a deal.

amazon truly has kick-started the industry that lurked in the shadows
for so many years with all the major players trying and failing to
launch a successful pay-as-you-go cloud computing service. i guess their
secret was extracting a service from their own successful projects,
instead of trying to come up with something new for others.

as for enterprises though, i do not see them embracing the cloud
platform as it is now, however there are some scenarios possible right
now, and i am sure many more will emerge:

-   a single batch that needs to be processed (amazon now has [hadoop
    services](http://aws.amazon.com/elasticmapreduce/) ; also consider
    load testing from the cloud, some sort of one-off processing, or
    anything else that is a spike in demand could be good)

<!-- -->

-   overflow capacity for something like flash traffic during holidays
    for retailers – extend your private infrastructure, or certain
    pieces of it into the cloud and wind down when you are done

<!-- -->

-   <span class="caps">POC</span>, development – it is hard to test on
    the same hardware as prod, so roll your stuff out on the cloud and
    then for prod/uat deployment put it back inside

<!-- -->

-   one-off isolated apps that can deal with current state of SLAs and
    lack of private clouds, or even pieces of existing apps

there is a chance for internal infrastructure folks to learn something
from the cloud experience. in most large companies servers and storage
have been increasingly provided as a service and billed back to the
projects, but provisioning is still not elastic, and utilization is
often the usual low numbers. granted, more and more are using vmware to
virtualize (at least dev/uat) to increase utilization, but it is a far
cry from the experience of the likes of amazon.

the ideas and some of the tech from the public clouds could and should
be looked at by the internal infrastructure people, and not just the
servers/storage, but also those that provide middleware services –
messaging and monitoring, for instance.

clouds in your own data centers? some of the vendors seem to head this
direction – give us the servers and the datacenters and we will create
cloud infrastructure for you, taking care of management, monitoring,
apis, provisioning, etc.

i wonder how the chargebacks in organizations will change between
departments – since instead of a capital investment upfront with
depreciation we can convert it to operating expense with pay for use
billing – would that allow us to win anything? of course, for small
companies it is great – no upfront costs, no hardware, etc.

ms azure is somewhat an outlier here – first of all, it lacks
tinkerability (yes, it is a term) – the barrier for entry is too high,
but at the same time it is not a vertical app, but a full-blown platform
with all the development tools in place. the problem is that it is too
opaque, and i would imagine it will be a while before the whole kitchen
sink has proper api, billing, provisioning, etc working properly – as
usual the idea is fantastic, but the implementation, knowing the track
record, is something to be wary of. since windows is notoriously hard to
automate, perhaps azure will finally sidestep this problem and offer
that as a service, but i cannot see how it can completely do it, unless
it provides something as easy and transparent as ssh+shell scripts and
declarative versioned management for that.

#### coming up

development in several directions – granularity of service, privacy of
the cloud; standards – one must talk about a certain place in the
continuum – standards for infrastructure level monitoring/provisioning
are perhaps possible, but once we run into more vertical services,
standards make little sense, since you are buying into the provider.

there will be consolidation, since, as failures of ibm and sun showed
and success of amazon shows, it is a low-margin business, and amazon
knows it first-hand.
