---
permalink: /2010/2/1/qcon2009sf-other-talks
date: '2010-02-01 07:15:00'
title: >-
    qcon2009sf: other talks
---

for completeness sake, in addition to [outstanding
talks](/2010/2/1/qcon2009sf-individual-talks), i should mention a few
others that were memorable.

i caught the second half of eric “DDD” evans
[talk](http://qconsf.com/sf2009/presentation/Strategic+Design:+Avoiding+Responsibility+Traps)
– it was moving at a glacial pace (a trait of a professional consultant
that is paid by the hour?) and was terribly overcrowded, but i liked
what i heard. he took the roundabout path to get to the importance of
evolution of the existing systems, but he made his point well with some
great insights along the way. i have been setting aside [his
book](http://domaindrivendesign.org/books#DDD) for years, and i know it
is long overdue, but i should read it.

i was surprised that none of the talks on the “cool stuff with java”
track appeared all that cool to me. perhaps i have already looked at the
tech behind them too closely, and the talks did not offer much on top of
that.

nevertheless, [project
voldemort](http://qconsf.com/sf2009/presentation/Project+Voldemort:+Scaling+Simple+Storage+At+LinkedIn)
talk was a good refresher on brewer’s <span class="caps">CAP</span>
theorem, consistent hashing (or DHTs), [amazon’s
"dynamo"](http://www.allthingsdistributed.com/2007/10/amazons_dynamo.html).
i wish it were more technical, since the devil is in the details, and i
wish there was more comparisons to other systems in this landscape (e.g.
[cassandra](http://incubator.apache.org/cassandra/) which seems to be
further ahead).

hadoop is pretty much a household name these days, so [a generic intro
to the tech and its
ecosystem](http://qconsf.com/sf2009/presentation/Hadoop) did not do much
for me. still, having built and run <span class="caps">ETL</span>
environments in the past, i think that anyone in this position must
consider hadoop these days – after all, if your <span
class="caps">ETL</span> environment is trying to scale vertically and is
using one of the big boys’ mammoth software, then it will make sense to
compare 1MM for the license + hardware costs with 100K for commodity
hardware + free software. this is a subject for a whole different post
though.

by the end of the conference i have acquired a nervous twitch each time
i heard another attempt at cloud computing definition. i did like [stu
charlton’s
talk](http://qconsf.com/sf2009/presentation/Agile+Development+to+Agile+Operations)
though – he had a good business perspective, and although i do not
believe in his product, i would be keeping an eye on it, since they are
trying to solve a real problem.

finally, i was disappointed by my own reception of “architectures you’ve
always wondered about” track. facebook, linkedin, amazon – i think i’ve
already knew enough about them, so signal to noise ratio in these talks
was too low for me, and i could not justify staying there for long.
